+++
date = '2025-01-18T12:33:41+11:00'
draft = false
title = '20/01/25 Speech'
tags = ['speech', 'grammar', 'learning']
+++

There’s a movie with Will Smith called the Pursuit of Happiness. It's about a
homeless salesman down on his luck, struggling to make ends meet. He’d been
given a silver lining which was a chance at becoming a stock broker through an
unpaid internship. There’s a scene, in which he’s with a manager in a cab, and
whilst giving him his elevator pitch, the manager is ambivalent because he’s
engrossed in this rubik's cube that he can’t solve. Will Smith takes it and in
an attempt to show his worthiness of the position he solves the cube before they
arrive at their destination. It’s an inspiring moment in the film to show that
the protagonist is clever and that despite his poor circumstances his tenacity
and problem-solving skills could lead him to be a promising stock broker. It
also left upon me the impression since I’d seen that movie that I should be able
to solve a rubik's cube without guidance. This was wrong. Many years after
seeing that film, I finally bought a rubik's cube midway through 2024. But I
ended up solving it at 3am on New Year’s Day, the whole time looking at a
website that showed me the exact moves to use. Even when I thought I had
employed the right moves the cube wouldn’t progress, probably because I had been
at it feverishly for the last 4 hours. So I can only imagine how difficult it
would be to solve it cold turkey. Has anyone here ever solved a rubik's cube?
Essentially as a beginner you solve it in layers, employing algorithms that
won’t disrupt the progress you’ve made. Knowing the algorithms is different from
understanding how they work. So even now despite being able to solve a rubik's
cube, I couldn’t tell you why certain moves get the right block in the right
position. But I’m almost certain that had I tried to solve the cube by
understanding how every algorithm worked, it’d be collecting dust on my bedhead.

“Young man, in mathematics you don’t understand things. You just get used to
them.” This is a quote from John van Neumman, a scientist who formalised the
design of computer architectures, contributed to game theory, quantum mechanics
and using computers for weather prediction. So pretty much he’s kinda a big deal
and probably someone who knows what he’s talking about. Except he doesn’t as he
just said. 

It’s a bit strange to say that despite being quite proficient at something, you
don’t understand it. But maybe I can prove to you that this happens more often
than we think in our daily lives. 

## Language
If you were to relearn English again and get back to your current level how
would you go about it? Perhaps you’d learn a couple of simple words and concepts
at first that are so intrinsic to the human condition that they’re communicable
via broad gestures, images or symbols. Happy, sad, left, right, morning,
evening, water, food, numbers, colours.Then you’d learn how to build phrases
using these simple words to express more complex ideas, “take the second left
after the happy green stairs in the morning at 9 o'clock”. And then you’d learn
a bit of grammar to understand how to construct full sentences using the words
you now understand. 

The grammar is the rulebook for the language, it dictates what is a valid
sentence and what isn’t. As speakers of the English language we can determine
when a sentence is correct or not and so it would seem that we got to where we
are with English by “understanding” this rulebook. 

So we’d know what an indefinite article is, a gerund, dependent clause,
intransitive verb, subordinating conjunction, infinitive verb phrase. Unless
you’ve studied grammar you probably have no idea what some of those terms mean
and neither do I and yet I’m willing to bet we use these grammatical entities
everyday. 

Language is just as much of a technology as the smartphone, pc or car in that
it’s a tool to address one of humanity’s problems. The ability to communicate
specific things to others. But in the same way you don’t become good at using a
smartphone by reading through the user manual, you don’t become good at a
language by reading its rulebook. Stephen Krashen, a firm believer in
distinguishing between language learning and language acquisition says that “if
we give people messages that are interesting and comprehensible, grammar to a
large extent takes care of itself.”


## Programming
Recently the non-profit I volunteer for picked up another web developer to help
me with the project. I had been stuck on how to work with Wordpress in order to
display the content exactly how I wanted it to because unlike other frameworks
it's more akin to something like Microsoft Word then well, … coding. 

When I first started, I dug into the guts of Wordpress, understanding things like:
* Themes
* The theme hierarchy
* Plugins
* Block development AND
* The directory structure

I’d been stuck on certain features because the task of writing the code bespoke
to the needs of the non-profit would have to interact with Wordpress API and
that had a huge learning curve to it.

The new volunteer whom I had a meeting with last week demoed what he’d
accomplished in less than 2 weeks using some plugins that were publicly
available. It had all the features the non-profit was requesting for that I had
been stuck on for about 2 months. Funnily enough, like me he had the same sort
of discomfort in having to use Wordpress because he came from a programming
background. The difference was he had no trouble picking up the tools to get
building instead of trying to take them apart. 

## Aesop
We live through life to do things, not to learn things. Perfect is the enemy of
good and learning is how you become perfect. I don’t want to spend my life
learning Chinese, I want to understand and speak it so that I can travel
overseas and get in touch with my heritage and family. I don’t want to
understand how the latest fandangled Javascript framework works as much as I
want to use it to build something meaningful and when that manager was watching
Will Smith intently trying to solve the rubik's cube, he wasn’t concerned with
whether he was using the beginner’s method or CFOP, he was just trying to see if
he could solve it before they arrived at their destination.